# Transport in Cells
## Explain how substances may move in and out of cells across the cell membrane via diffusion
Substances diffuse in to or out of the cell with a concentration gradient.
## Describe diffusion
Diffusion is where dissolved substances move from high concentration (of the solute) to low concentration (called a concentration gradient). Diffusion requires no energy.
## Recall that some of the substances transported in and out of cells by diffusion are oxygen and carbon dioxide in gas exchange, and of the waste product urea from cells into the blood plasma for excretion in the kidney
yep
## Describe factors that affect the rate of diffusion
- distance
- surface area of interface
- concentration difference
- temperature
- density of solvent
## Recall that a single-celled organism has a relatively large surface area to volume ration to allow sufficient transport of molecules into and out of the cell
yep
## Explain how the small intestine and lungs in mammals, gills in fish, and the roots and leaves in plants are adapted for exchanging materials
- small intestine - villi to increase surface area, thin wall to decrease required distaance
- lungs - alveoli to increase surface area, thin wall to decrease required distance
- gills - folds to increase surface area
- roots - hairs to increase surface area
- leaves - gaps to allow gases to move easily
## List factors that increase the effectiveness of an exchange surface
- surface area
- thickness
## Describe osmosis
Osmosis is where a solvent, typically water, moves from high concentration (of solvent) (and thus low concentration of solute) to low concentration across a semi-permeable membrane. Osmosis requires no energy.
## Recall that active transport moves substances from a more dilute solution to a more concentrated solution (against a concentration gradient). This requires energy from respiration.
yep
## Link the structure of a root hair cell to its function
Has a pointy bit to increase surface area for better rate of osmosis and active transport
## Describe a use of active transport in both plants and animals
- plants - minerals from soil through roots
- animals - uptake of glucose in small intestine
## Explain the difference between diffusion, osmosis, and active transport
Diffusion moves a solute, whereas osmosis moves a solvent. They both move with a concentration gradient and require no energy, whereas active transport requires energy and moves againts a concentration gradient
