# Communicable Diseases
## Explain how diseases caused by bacteria, viruses, protists, and fungi are spread in animals and plants.
- fungal diseases can be spread by spores, or by physical contact
- bacterial, protozoan, and viral diseases can be spread by bodily fluids or breathing
- some bacterial, protozoan, and viral diseases can be spread by various animal vectors, such as mosquitoes with malaria

## Define the term pathogen
A pathogen is an organism which causes disease.

## Explain how bacteria and viruses may reproduce in the body and why they make you feel ill
Bacteria reproduce by mitosis and viruses infect cells and use them to reproduce. Viruses and bacteria produce toxins or disrupt cell functions, which makes you feel ill. 

## Know that measles is a viral disease and describe the symptoms
yep

- fever
- inflamed eyes
- white spots in the mouth
- rash of large flat blotches

## Explain the effects of HIV and how it is transmitted
HIV leads to AIDS if left untreated, which means the body's immune system is unable to fight of even small infections. HIV is transmitted through some bodily fluids: semen, blood, and breast milk. This means it can be transmitted by sharing needles or through sexual intercourse.

## Describe Tobacco Mosaic Virus (TMV)
TMV is a plant disease which causes mosaic-like patterns of mottling and discolouration on the leaves.

## Know that salmonella food poisoning is spread by bacteria ingested in food, or on food prepared in unhygienic conditions
yep

## Describe the symptoms of salmonella food poisoning
- bloody stool
- stomach cramps
- vomiting
- diarrhoea
- cold and chills

## Know how gonorrhea is transmitted and how its spread can be reduced
Gonorrhea is spread by unprotected sexual intercourse. Its spread can be reduced by using condoms.

## State the cause of gonorrhea and describe its symptoms and how it is treated
Gonorrhea is caused by the bacterium _Neisseria Gonorrhoeae_. It causes a thick green/yellow discharge from the vagina or penis, as well as pain when urinating and bleeding. It can be treated with simple anti-biotics.

## Describe rose black spot and state its cause
Rose black spot which causes blackening of the leaves and decreased "plant vigour", and is caused by the fungus _Diplocarpon Rosae_.

## Know how rose black spot is spread in the environment and how it can be treated
Rose black spot is spread by spores in water, such as after rainfall. It can be treated with insecticides and fungicides.

## Describe malaria and state its cause
Malaria is a protozoan disease caused by _Plasmodium Falciparum_. Its symptoms include diarrhoea, headaches, high temperature, feeling hot and shivery, muscle pains, and vomiting.

## Know how malaria is spread and how to reduce the spread of the disease
Malaria is spread by mosquito bites. Its spread can be reduced using mosquito nets and insect repellent.

## Describe some of the body's natural defences against infection
The body defends against infections with physical barriers as well as the immune system. Physical barriers include:
- mucus
- saliva
- skin
- cornea
- stomach acid
- nose hair
- earwax

## Explain the roll of white blood cells
There are two main types of white blood cells:
- lymphocytes, which produce antibodies and antitoxins,
- and phagocytes, which engulf pathogens in a process called _phagocytosis_

## Describe the process of vaccination
Vaccination is where the immune system is stimulated to produce memory cells to improve future response to specific pathogens.
1. A weakened or dead form of the pathogen is introduced in to the body, typically by injection
2. The immune system responds by producing antibodies
3. Memory cells are produced which allow faster production of antibodies in case of further infection
This process is sometimes repeated to allow the body to improve further.

## Explain herd immunity
Herd immunity is where the non-immune members of a population can be indirectly protected from an infectious disease if most of the population are immune to it, because it cannot spread easily.

## State what antibiotics can treat
Antibiotics can treat bacterial infections by killing bacteria. They work by destroying the cell wall of the bacteria.

## Explain the development of antibiotic resistant bacteria
Since the invention and subsequent ubiquity of antibiotics, bacteria have evolved to be resistant to some. For example, MRSA (methicilin-resistant _Staphylococcus Aureus_), is a form of _Staphylococcus Aureus_ prevalent in hospitals, which has evolved to not be affected by the common antibiotic methicillin.

## Define painkillers
Painkillers are drugs used to relieve pain.

## Explain why it is hard to develop drugs that kill viruses
It is hard to develop drugs that kill viruses because viruses infect the body's own cells, and so it is hard to chemically distinguish healthy cells from infected ones.

## Know that traditionally, drugs were extracted from plants and microorganisms and give some common examples including who discovered penicillin and from what
- penicillin discovered by Dr. Fleming from mould
- aspirin, painkiller, from silver birch
- opiates, painkillers, from poppies

## State that most new drugs are synthesised by chemists in the pharmaceutical industry but the starting point may still be a chemical extracted from a plant
yep

## For new medicinal drugs, explain the stages in precilinical and clinical trial
1. Drugs are tested using computer models and on human cells from stem cells to determine if they are harmful, viable, or likely to work at all (preclinical)
2. Drugs are tested on animals such as mice or rats to determine if they are harmful (preclinical)
3. Drugs are tested on a small group of healthy volunteers to assess the side-effects (clinical)
4. Drugs are tested on a large group of patients to determine the dose, viability, and efficacy (clinical)

## Define placebo
The psychosematic effect of a drug where it seems to have positive effects but are actually just the results of the patient's belief in the drug.

## Explain double-blind trials
A double-blind trial is where neither the administrator nor the participants know which treatment they are receiving (placebo or real) to prevent bias.
